rust/studio/README.md, before:

# onerom-studio

A GUI front-end for interacting with One ROM and managing firmware images.

## Releasing

All instructions assume you are in the `rust/studio` directory.  Steps 1-3 can be run in parallel.

Steps:
1. Build the schema(s):

    ```bash
    cargo run --release --bin gen-schema
    cargo run --release --bin gen-manifest
    git diff manifest/app-schema.json ../../../one-rom-images/studio/app-schema.json
    # If differences
    cp manifest/app-schema.json ../../../one-rom-images/studio/app-schema.json
    ```

2. Create Mac build - on a Mac, using a local terminal (not ssh) with the appropriate Apple Developer ID certificate installed in the Login keychain:

    ```bash
    scripts/build-mac.sh
    ```

    Will pop-up for Apple ID credentials for code signing and notarization.

3. Create Windows build - on a Windows machine, using a local powershell, with smartcard plugged in:

    ```powershell
    .\scripts\build-windows.ps1
    ``` 

    Will prompt for smartcard pin.

4. Create Linux builds - on a Linux (x86_64) machine:

    ```bash
    scripts/build-linux.sh
    ```

5. Copy the built installers from the `dist/` directory on each platform to the Linux machine's `dist/` directory.

6. On the Linux machine, run the release script to upload the files and update the manifest - assumes you have the images.onerom.org github repo at ../../../one-rom-images:

    ```bash
    scripts/release.py --input-dir dist --output-dir ../../../one-rom-images
    ```

7. Commit one-rom-images changes and push:

    ```bash
    cd ../../../one-rom-images
    git add .
    git commit -m "Update One ROM Studio releases"
    git push
    ```

8. Tag the current commit with the version and push:

    ```bash
    git tag studio-vX.Y.Z
    git push origin studio-vX.Y.Z
    ```

9. Check new releases appear at https://onerom.org/studio/

10. Update the Studio manifest `one-rom-images/studio.json` with the latest version.

## Updating Mac Icons

1. From an up to date Apple Silicon Mac, open `assets/onerom-liquid-glass.icon`.

2. Modify the icon as needed using the Icon Composer application.

3. Regenerate `assets/onerom-liquid-glass-icons/Assets.car` using:

    ```bash
    scripts/create-mac-icon-ac.sh
    ```

4. Commit and push both `assets/onerom-liquid-glass.icon` and `assets/onerom-liquid-glass-icons/Assets.car`.

## Creating a new Code Signing Certificate

See https://piers.rocks/2025/10/30/certum-open-source-code-sign.html

## CI

`.github/workflows/build-studio.yml` contains the CI instructions for building Studio.  However, it does not sign, so do not use the produced installers for release.

This CI runs on all pushes to the `rust/studio/`.

## 

## Dependencies

Assuming building Windows target on a Debian-based Linux distribution.

For building linux targets:

```bash
sudo apt install libudev-dev
```

Install the Rust Windows targets:

```bash
rustup target add x86_64-pc-windows-gnu
```

Install ming-w64 for Windows builds:

```bash
sudo apt install mingw-w64
```

To run th ARM64 Linux build you really need to be building on the platform (or using CI), as libudev is a pain to build as part of the cross compilation.

## Packaging Implementation

### Windows

Uses `cargo-packager` - see the following in `Cargo.toml`:

- `[package.metadata.packager]`
- `[package.metadata.packager.nsis]`

Code signing is done using `signtool.exe` called from `scripts/build-windows.ps1`.

### macOS

Uses `cargo-bundle` to create the macOS app bundle - see the following in `Cargo.toml`:

- `[package.metadata.bundle]`

`scripts/build-mac.sh` does code signing and notarization using `codesign` and `xcrun notarytool`.

`scripts/create-dmg.py` is used by `build-mac.sh` to create DMG installer.

### Linux

Uses `cargo-packager` to create a `.deb` package - see the following in `Cargo.toml`:

- `[package.metadata.packager]`
- `[package.metadata.packager.linux]`
- `[package.metadata.packager.deb]`

`scripts/build-linux.sh` builds the package, including adding maintainer scripts to handle libudev rules installation.

Commit message:

new script to build all platforms/architectures

rust/studio/README.md, after:

# onerom-studio

A GUI front-end for interacting with One ROM and managing firmware images.

## Releasing

All instructions assume you are in the `rust/studio` directory.  Steps 1-3 can be run in parallel.

Steps:
1. Build the schema(s):

    ```bash
    cargo run --release --bin gen-schema
    cargo run --release --bin gen-manifest
    git diff manifest/app-schema.json ../../../one-rom-images/studio/app-schema.json
    # If differences
    cp manifest/app-schema.json ../../../one-rom-images/studio/app-schema.json
    ```

2. Use the `build-release.sh` script to build Studio for all platforms and architectures.  This requires ssh access to build machines for each platform and clones the current main branch to build from:

    ```bash
    scripts/build-release.sh pin=WIN_SIGNING_PIN
    ```

    Artifacts are placed in the `dist/` directory.

3. Run the release script to upload the files and update the manifest - assumes you have the images.onerom.org github repo at ../../../one-rom-images:

    ```bash
    scripts/release.py --input-dir dist --output-dir ../../../one-rom-images
    ```

4. Commit one-rom-images changes and push:

    ```bash
    cd ../../../one-rom-images
    git add .
    git commit -m "Update One ROM Studio releases"
    git push
    ```

5. Tag the current commit with the version and push:

    ```bash
    git tag studio-vX.Y.Z
    git push origin studio-vX.Y.Z
    ```

6. Check new releases appear at https://onerom.org/studio/

7. Update the Studio manifest `one-rom-images/studio.json` with the latest version.

## Updating Mac Icons

1. From an up to date Apple Silicon Mac, open `assets/onerom-liquid-glass.icon`.

2. Modify the icon as needed using the Icon Composer application.

3. Regenerate `assets/onerom-liquid-glass-icons/Assets.car` using:

    ```bash
    scripts/create-mac-icon-ac.sh
    ```

4. Commit and push both `assets/onerom-liquid-glass.icon` and `assets/onerom-liquid-glass-icons/Assets.car`.

## Creating a new Code Signing Certificate

See https://piers.rocks/2025/10/30/certum-open-source-code-sign.html

## CI

`.github/workflows/build-studio.yml` contains the CI instructions for building Studio.  However, it does not sign, so do not use the produced installers for release.

This CI runs on all pushes to the `rust/studio/`.

## 

## Dependencies

Assuming building Windows target on a Debian-based Linux distribution.

For building linux targets:

```bash
sudo apt install libudev-dev
```

Install the Rust Windows targets:

```bash
rustup target add x86_64-pc-windows-gnu
```

Install ming-w64 for Windows builds:

```bash
sudo apt install mingw-w64
```

To run th ARM64 Linux build you really need to be building on the platform (or using CI), as libudev is a pain to build as part of the cross compilation.

## Packaging Implementation

### Windows

Uses `cargo-packager` - see the following in `Cargo.toml`:

- `[package.metadata.packager]`
- `[package.metadata.packager.nsis]`

Code signing is done using `signtool.exe` called from `scripts/build-windows.ps1`.

### macOS

Uses `cargo-bundle` to create the macOS app bundle - see the following in `Cargo.toml`:

- `[package.metadata.bundle]`

`scripts/build-mac.sh` does code signing and notarization using `codesign` and `xcrun notarytool`.

`scripts/create-dmg.py` is used by `build-mac.sh` to create DMG installer.

### Linux

Uses `cargo-packager` to create a `.deb` package - see the following in `Cargo.toml`:

- `[package.metadata.packager]`
- `[package.metadata.packager.linux]`
- `[package.metadata.packager.deb]`

`scripts/build-linux.sh` builds the package, including adding maintainer scripts to handle libudev rules installation.
