docs/CONFIGURATION.md, before:

# Configuration

The top-level [Makefile](/Makefile) allows you to specify a significant number of configuration options, including developer and debug level options.  These are commented in the Makefile.

You can either pass options on the command line, or specify them in a config file which you then include using the `CONFIG` environment variable.  It is recommended to do this rather than modify the original `Makefile`.  For example:

```bash
# Specify ROM images on the command line
MCU=f411re HW_REV=e ROM_CONFIGS=file=images/test/0_63_8192.rom,type=2364,cs1=0 make run
```

```bash
# Or use a pre-built config file
MCU=f405rg CONFIG=config/c64.mk make run
```

## Mandatory Configuration

## `STM`

Defines your STM32 variant, for example:

```bash
MCU=f446re
```

See [Supported STM32 Microcontrollers](/README.md#supported-stm32-microcontrollers) for the list of supported variants.

## `HW_REV`

Use this to specify the hardware revision of your One ROM's PCB.  It is silkscreened on the underside of the PCB.  Other ways to identify the revision are:

- Rev D
  - Uses 0402 passives.
  - Has 2x4 jumpers next 2 pin 1 (3 image select jumpers and the `BOOT0` jumper).

- Rev E
  - Uses 0603 passives.
  - Has 2x5 jumpers next to pin 1 (4 image select jumpers and the `BOOT0` jumper).
  - Has a status LED roughly between pins 10 and 14.

```bash
HW_REV=e
```

## `ROM_CONFIGS`

Use this option to specify all of the ROM images to include in your One ROM firmware.  They will be numbered, in the order you provide them, starting from 0.  They can then be selected at boot type, using the image select jumpers.

The format of ROM_CONFIGS is:

```bash
ROM_CONFIGS=FIRST_ROM_INFO SECOND_ROM_INFO THIRD_ROM_INFO ...
```

Where each `..._ROM_INFO` takes the form:

```bash
key1=value1,key2=value2,...,command1,command2
```

Supported key/value pairs are:

- `set`: Optional.  Use for multi-ROMs sets, with multiple images in a set.  You need a line per image within the set, so multiple lines with the same `set` value.  If not specified, the image is in its own set.
- `file`: Required.  The path to the ROM file to include in the firmware.  This can be a local file, or a URL.
- `extract`: Optional.  Valid only if `file` is a URL, and the file to be downloaded is a ZIP file.  This specifies the path within the ZIP file to extract the ROM from.  Use URL encoding to encode any special characters in the path, such as spaces (%20).
- `licence`: Optional.  URL to path for this ROM image's licence.  Including this causes the build process to force the user to explicitly acknowledge they accept the licence terms before the firmware is built.
- `type`: Required.  One of 2364, 2332, 2316 for 8KB, 4KB and 2KB ROM images respectively.  The `file` must be small enough to fit into the specified type.
- `cs1`: Required.  0 or 1, specifying chip select line 1 acts as active low (0) or active high (1).
- `cs2`: Valid for `type=2332` or `type=2316`.  0 or 1, specifying chip select line 2 acts as active low (0) or active high (1).
- `cs3`: Valid for `type=2316`only. 0 or 1, specifying chip select line 3 acts as active low (0) or active high (1).

Supprted commands are:

- `dup`: Optional.  Valid only if file size is less than indicated by `type`, and only if ROM type size if an exact multiple of file size.  Causes the ROM image to be duplicated to fill the remaining space.  This is useful for 2KB and 4KB ROM images which need to be exposed as larger ROMs.
- `pad`: Optional.  Valid only if file size ia less than indicated by `type`.  Pad out the remaining space with 0xAA bytes.  Useful for 2KB and 4KB ROM images which need to be exposed as larger ROMs.

See [`config`](/config/) for examples of how to specify ROM images.

## Advanced Configuration

A few of the most useful advanced options are described below, but see the [Makefile](/Makefile) for the full list.

### `SWD`

Setting this to 1 enables SWD support within the firmware.  If you do **not** enable this, you will be unable to easily reprogram the device after flashing the image - you will have to use the `BOOT0` jumper.  Also see [`BOOTLOADER`](#bootloader).

This option is also required for [`BOOT_LOGGING`](#boot_logging) (and the other [`logging`](/docs/LOGGING.md) options) to work, as it uses SWD for logging.

### `BOOT_LOGGING`

This is enabled by default, and logs using RTT over SWD as the One ROM boots up.  It stops logging when it enters its main ROM serving loop for performance reasons.

You may wish to disable this logging, if startup speed of One ROM is a problem.  With boot logging enabled, One ROM takes around 2ms to start up and be ready to serve the ROM.  Without boot logging it takes around 500us.

These timings will vary based on clock speed.

### `FREQ`

This is not specified by default, which uses the maximum frequency for the chosen STM32F4xxR variant.  You can lower the frequency if you want to reduce One ROM's power draw.  The [Makefile](/Makefile) gives some guidance on what values are required by what systems, but your mileage may vary.

### `OVERCLOCK`

⚠️ Use with Caution

Enabling this feature allows you to specify a higher frequency than supported by a particular STM32F4xxR variant.  One ROM uses very few peripherals and hence it should be possible for the STM32 to be powered at a higher than stock frequency, but the silicon may not be stable.

The STM32F405 seems to max out at around 250MHz, probably due to the maximum number of flash wait states that can be configured.

The GD32F405 appears to run at 300MHz, although some host instabilities were noticed at this speed - it is possible One ROM is running too fast (serving bytes too quickly, or on brief chip select line glitches, or de-serving them too quickly?).

While currently untested, the STM32F446 may be able to be pushed much higher - as it has capacity for wait states supporting up to around 500MHz.

The STM32F405 seems to max out at around 250MHz, probably due to the maximum number of flash wait states that can be configured.

The GD32F405 appears to run at 300MHz, although some host instabilities were noticed at this speed - possible SDRR is running too fast (serving bytes too quickly, or on brief chip select line glitches, or de-serving them too quickly?).

While currently untested, the STM32F446 may be able to be pushed much higher - as it has capacity for wait states supporting up to around 500MHz.

### `STATUS_LED`

One ROM hardware revisions E and onwards provide a status LED, which is lit once the One ROM has booted and is ready to serve the image.  It also flashes this LED if it crashes.

If you want to reduce power consumption, or just not have the LED lit, use this option (or do not populate the LED on your board).

### `BOOTLOADER`

In addition to the BOOT0 jumper, One ROM provides an option, disabled by default, which will put the STM32 into bootloader mode if all image select jumpers are closed.  This may be useful if you consistently hit [problems flashing](/README.md#flashing-problems).

To use:

- Close all image select jumpers (`1`, `2`, `4`, `8`), but not the BOOT0 (`B0`) jumper.
- Reboot the One ROM device.  It will now be in bootloader mode.
- Optionally change the image select jumpers to the selection you want when the device next boots.
- Reprogram the One ROM device.  It will then reboot, re-read the image select jumpers and start serving the appropriate image.

Enabling this option means that the 16th image (if installed) cannot be selected.

### `SERVE_ALG`

This option allows you to select which serving algorithm to use.

A - Checks address lines all the time, and applies to data lines (which are inputs when CS is not active).  CS is checked twice as frequently as the address lines.

B - Checks address lines only when CS is active, and applies to data lines (which are already outptts).  CS and address lines are read with the same frequency.

In all cases tested, `B` appears to be the superior algorithm, but `A` is kept in case it is incompatible with some systems.

SDRR defaults to `B` is no algorithm is specified for single-ROM sets, and requires `B` (which is applies automatically, even if you specify `A`) for multi-ROM sets.

## Extra C Flags

There are some additional options that can be compiled in/out based on "hidden" C #defines.  You can use `EXTRA_C_FLAGS` to pass these in on the `make` command.

For example this disables loading the ROM table to the STM32F405's CCM RAM, instead loading it to (normal) RAM (SRAM):

```bash
EXTRA_C_FLAGS=-DDISABLE_CCM=1 MCU=f405rg make
```

See [`include.h`](../sdrr/include/include.h) for more information on available options.  These may be have left in a non-compiling state - raise an issue if you have problems.

Commit message:

Add release 0.6.2 - first PIO RAM serving algorithm for Fire 24 C/D (#113)
* create 40 pin config file - tests run

* make rams configurable using config files

* get tests running in 0.7.0 branch

* further ram improvements

* get preloading data to RAM working

* Free up 512KB on RP2350 for chip image

* Free up 512KB on RP2350 for chip image

* fix MAIN_LOOP_LOGGING

* fix ROM_IMPL_DEBUG

* remove execute from RAM tests

* make clippy happier

* add fire-24-e

* Add possible enhancement

* remove format

* add fire-28-a3 kicad files

* fix #89, correct IceCpuFreq and FireCpuFreq in rom-config.json schema

* deprecate .mk style configs

* prepare for release

* Move back to 0.6.2 with non-breaking config changes

* fix 64 bit logging issue

* update gitignore

* fix #109

* fix stm32 flashing

* update docs to use new scripts/onerom.sh for building

* ready for PR

* parse new sdrr_pins fields

* fix 23xxx 28 pin ROMs

docs/CONFIGURATION.md, after:

# Configuration

This document describes Makefile configuration.  This uses also style ROM config files (see [`old-config`](/old-config/) for examples).  Generally, blank firmware images are now created using EXCLUDE_METADATA=1 in the Makefile configuration, and then Studio or Web to construct and image with ROM images - using new style config files (see ['onerom-config'](/onerom-config/) for examples).

---

The top-level [Makefile](/Makefile) allows you to specify a significant number of configuration options, including developer and debug level options.  These are commented in the Makefile.

You can either pass options on the command line, or specify them in a config file which you then include using the `CONFIG` environment variable.  It is recommended to do this rather than modify the original `Makefile`.  For example:

```bash
# Specify ROM images on the command line
MCU=f411re HW_REV=e ROM_CONFIGS=file=images/test/0_63_8192.rom,type=2364,cs1=0 make run
```

```bash
# Or use a pre-built config file
MCU=f405rg CONFIG=old-config/c64.mk make run
```

## Mandatory Configuration

## `STM`

Defines your STM32 variant, for example:

```bash
MCU=f446re
```

See [Supported STM32 Microcontrollers](/README.md#supported-stm32-microcontrollers) for the list of supported variants.

## `HW_REV`

Use this to specify the hardware revision of your One ROM's PCB.  It is silkscreened on the underside of the PCB.  Other ways to identify the revision are:

- Rev D
  - Uses 0402 passives.
  - Has 2x4 jumpers next 2 pin 1 (3 image select jumpers and the `BOOT0` jumper).

- Rev E
  - Uses 0603 passives.
  - Has 2x5 jumpers next to pin 1 (4 image select jumpers and the `BOOT0` jumper).
  - Has a status LED roughly between pins 10 and 14.

```bash
HW_REV=e
```

## `ROM_CONFIGS`

Use this option to specify all of the ROM images to include in your One ROM firmware.  They will be numbered, in the order you provide them, starting from 0.  They can then be selected at boot type, using the image select jumpers.

The format of ROM_CONFIGS is:

```bash
ROM_CONFIGS=FIRST_ROM_INFO SECOND_ROM_INFO THIRD_ROM_INFO ...
```

Where each `..._ROM_INFO` takes the form:

```bash
key1=value1,key2=value2,...,command1,command2
```

Supported key/value pairs are:

- `set`: Optional.  Use for multi-ROMs sets, with multiple images in a set.  You need a line per image within the set, so multiple lines with the same `set` value.  If not specified, the image is in its own set.
- `file`: Required.  The path to the ROM file to include in the firmware.  This can be a local file, or a URL.
- `extract`: Optional.  Valid only if `file` is a URL, and the file to be downloaded is a ZIP file.  This specifies the path within the ZIP file to extract the ROM from.  Use URL encoding to encode any special characters in the path, such as spaces (%20).
- `licence`: Optional.  URL to path for this ROM image's licence.  Including this causes the build process to force the user to explicitly acknowledge they accept the licence terms before the firmware is built.
- `type`: Required.  One of 2364, 2332, 2316 for 8KB, 4KB and 2KB ROM images respectively.  The `file` must be small enough to fit into the specified type.
- `cs1`: Required.  0 or 1, specifying chip select line 1 acts as active low (0) or active high (1).
- `cs2`: Valid for `type=2332` or `type=2316`.  0 or 1, specifying chip select line 2 acts as active low (0) or active high (1).
- `cs3`: Valid for `type=2316`only. 0 or 1, specifying chip select line 3 acts as active low (0) or active high (1).

Supprted commands are:

- `dup`: Optional.  Valid only if file size is less than indicated by `type`, and only if ROM type size if an exact multiple of file size.  Causes the ROM image to be duplicated to fill the remaining space.  This is useful for 2KB and 4KB ROM images which need to be exposed as larger ROMs.
- `pad`: Optional.  Valid only if file size ia less than indicated by `type`.  Pad out the remaining space with 0xAA bytes.  Useful for 2KB and 4KB ROM images which need to be exposed as larger ROMs.

See [`old-config`](/old-config/) for examples of how to specify ROM images.

## Advanced Configuration

A few of the most useful advanced options are described below, but see the [Makefile](/Makefile) for the full list.

### `SWD`

Setting this to 1 enables SWD support within the firmware.  If you do **not** enable this, you will be unable to easily reprogram the device after flashing the image - you will have to use the `BOOT0` jumper.  Also see [`BOOTLOADER`](#bootloader).

This option is also required for [`BOOT_LOGGING`](#boot_logging) (and the other [`logging`](/docs/LOGGING.md) options) to work, as it uses SWD for logging.

### `BOOT_LOGGING`

This is enabled by default, and logs using RTT over SWD as the One ROM boots up.  It stops logging when it enters its main ROM serving loop for performance reasons.

You may wish to disable this logging, if startup speed of One ROM is a problem.  With boot logging enabled, One ROM takes around 2ms to start up and be ready to serve the ROM.  Without boot logging it takes around 500us.

These timings will vary based on clock speed.

### `FREQ`

This is not specified by default, which uses the maximum frequency for the chosen STM32F4xxR variant.  You can lower the frequency if you want to reduce One ROM's power draw.  The [Makefile](/Makefile) gives some guidance on what values are required by what systems, but your mileage may vary.

### `OVERCLOCK`

⚠️ Use with Caution

Enabling this feature allows you to specify a higher frequency than supported by a particular STM32F4xxR variant.  One ROM uses very few peripherals and hence it should be possible for the STM32 to be powered at a higher than stock frequency, but the silicon may not be stable.

The STM32F405 seems to max out at around 250MHz, probably due to the maximum number of flash wait states that can be configured.

The GD32F405 appears to run at 300MHz, although some host instabilities were noticed at this speed - it is possible One ROM is running too fast (serving bytes too quickly, or on brief chip select line glitches, or de-serving them too quickly?).

While currently untested, the STM32F446 may be able to be pushed much higher - as it has capacity for wait states supporting up to around 500MHz.

The STM32F405 seems to max out at around 250MHz, probably due to the maximum number of flash wait states that can be configured.

The GD32F405 appears to run at 300MHz, although some host instabilities were noticed at this speed - possible SDRR is running too fast (serving bytes too quickly, or on brief chip select line glitches, or de-serving them too quickly?).

While currently untested, the STM32F446 may be able to be pushed much higher - as it has capacity for wait states supporting up to around 500MHz.

### `STATUS_LED`

One ROM hardware revisions E and onwards provide a status LED, which is lit once the One ROM has booted and is ready to serve the image.  It also flashes this LED if it crashes.

If you want to reduce power consumption, or just not have the LED lit, use this option (or do not populate the LED on your board).

### `BOOTLOADER`

In addition to the BOOT0 jumper, One ROM provides an option, disabled by default, which will put the STM32 into bootloader mode if all image select jumpers are closed.  This may be useful if you consistently hit [problems flashing](/README.md#flashing-problems).

To use:

- Close all image select jumpers (`1`, `2`, `4`, `8`), but not the BOOT0 (`B0`) jumper.
- Reboot the One ROM device.  It will now be in bootloader mode.
- Optionally change the image select jumpers to the selection you want when the device next boots.
- Reprogram the One ROM device.  It will then reboot, re-read the image select jumpers and start serving the appropriate image.

Enabling this option means that the 16th image (if installed) cannot be selected.

### `SERVE_ALG`

This option allows you to select which serving algorithm to use.

A - Checks address lines all the time, and applies to data lines (which are inputs when CS is not active).  CS is checked twice as frequently as the address lines.

B - Checks address lines only when CS is active, and applies to data lines (which are already outptts).  CS and address lines are read with the same frequency.

In all cases tested, `B` appears to be the superior algorithm, but `A` is kept in case it is incompatible with some systems.

SDRR defaults to `B` is no algorithm is specified for single-ROM sets, and requires `B` (which is applies automatically, even if you specify `A`) for multi-ROM sets.

## Extra C Flags

There are some additional options that can be compiled in/out based on "hidden" C #defines.  You can use `EXTRA_C_FLAGS` to pass these in on the `make` command.

For example this disables loading the ROM table to the STM32F405's CCM RAM, instead loading it to (normal) RAM (SRAM):

```bash
EXTRA_C_FLAGS=-DDISABLE_CCM=1 MCU=f405rg make
```

See [`include.h`](../sdrr/include/include.h) for more information on available options.  These may be have left in a non-compiling state - raise an issue if you have problems.
